Dec 19th 2020FacebookTwitterLinkedInWhatsAppIN THE GOLDEN age of comic books, American children devoured stories about fantastical superheroes. The National Urban League, an organisation devoted to racial justice, published a comic of its own, Negro Heroes, filled with inspirational black people it had no need to invent. Its 1948 issue featured Jackie Robinson, who had recently broken baseball’s colour bar, on the cover. But it also celebrated a less obvious figure: Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander, one of the league’s leading lights and the first African-American to earn a PhD in economics. “You will get a real thrill as you read about these people,” it promised.Economists are reviving Alexander, born in Philadelphia in 1898, as a heroine for today. In 2018 a pair of young black women formed the Sadie Collective to help others pursue careers in the field. In 2021 the National Economic Association, a group supporting minorities, will celebrate the centenary of Alexander’s PhD award at their annual gathering. Nina Banks, author of a forthcoming biography, notes that economists have done a poor job of including women or African-Americans in the history of economic thought. Alexander’s career shows what they are missing.Like many comic-book heroes, she combined an illustrious lineage with early adversity. Her grandfather was a much-published bishop, her uncle was a renowned painter, her father was the first black American to graduate in law from the University of Pennsylvania and her aunt was the first black woman certified to practise medicine in Alabama. She attended the prestigious M Street High School, which often hosted the country’s leading black intellectuals. “We studied Negro history from living exhibits—not history books,” she said. But her father ran off when she was only a year old, vanishing so completely from her life that she assumed he was dead until her teenage years.Starting as an undergraduate in Penn’s School of Education in 1916, she faced disdain for her ambitions, followed by resentment at her achievements. No one told her how to find the right classroom or the right books. Her first-year classmates barely spoke to her—except one, who befriended her, then tried to copy her exams. A fellowship to pursue graduate work was initially denied to her after a librarian accused her of meddling with another student’s books. He had mistaken her for another black woman on campus. “Such circumstances made a student either a dropout or a survivor so strong that she could not be overcome, regardless of the indignities,” Alexander later said.Her heroism was of the quiet sort. She responded to slights with an almost militant courtesy. At a regular tea organised by the students, she was not trusted to contribute sandwiches but asked to bring olives instead. In response, she asked her grandfather’s cook (who had previously worked at the governor’s mansion in Bermuda) to prepare something special. When she unwrapped the beautiful sandwiches, “all eyes were agog and mouths watering”.Alexander was awarded her PhD in a blaze of publicity. She recalled marching down Broad Street with photographers “shooting her from every side”. She and the press initially thought she was the first black American woman to get a PhD in any subject—a misconception she was not always careful to correct. (Georgiana Simpson, a teacher at M Street High School, received her PhD a day earlier.) Alexander’s elation faded quickly when she tried to get a job worthy of her talents. She spent two lonely years with an insurance firm in North Carolina, then another year as a housewife (“I...almost lost my mind”) before returning to Penn to get a law degree.Her subsequent career as a lawyer and activist was full of zap and pow. After joining her husband’s law firm in 1927, the pair helped desegregate Philadelphia’s hotels, theatres and cinemas, offering to represent, without charge, any victim of segregation prepared to show up in court. They had the manager of the cinema opposite their law office arrested so often he eventually appeared before them waving a handkerchief in surrender. In 1947 she was appointed to President Harry Truman’s committee on civil rights, alongside Charles Wilson, the boss of General Electric, and Franklin Roosevelt, son of the previous president. (Even so, the Hotel Statler in Washington, DC would not seat her for lunch until Mr Wilson intervened.)It is tempting to see Alexander’s exit from economics as an early example of the discipline’s particular difficulty in retaining black scholars. That would be a mistake, argues Ms Banks. Alexander’s years as an economics PhD student were her happiest at Penn. “I was the pet, the darling of the faculty,” she recalled. The head of the university’s insurance department was incensed that he could not find her a better job. The obstacles she faced were imposed by society at large. The two black women who received PhDs in the same year in other subjects took years to find university jobs.Although she had to leave academic economics, the discipline never left her. Her many speeches and writings show that she continued to think of herself as an economist. She cited statistics more often than legal cases. She believed that steady, productive employment was both an index of racial justice and a means of attaining it. And her ideas evolved in response to the economic trends of the day.A neglected streamHer dissertation was prompted by the migration of 40,000 southern blacks to Philadelphia’s factories during the first world war. Alexander wanted to know whether the mostly “untrained, illiterate” newcomers would adapt to an industrial economy or drag down Philadelphia’s existing black population, a community “of culture, education and some financial means”.As a black woman, she won intimate access to the financial lives of 100 migrant households, documenting their spending on everything from kerosene to vaudeville tickets. The migrants were corralled into overcrowded, overpriced homes. Alexander noted falling plaster, broken floorboards and the “vile” odour from toilets in disrepair. But the households did not rely on charity. And 64% earned enough to afford a fair standard of living, as she calculated it, provided they could rent housing on the same terms as white families and avoid “unwise” spending decisions, such as buying things in smaller quantities than necessary.Her foray into field work and her eye for behavioural quirks fit surprisingly well with today’s fashions in economics. The discipline has moved on from armchair theorising about rationally optimising agents. But fashions can be circular, and her dissertation was in keeping with its own times as well as today’s. The distinction between economics and sociology was fuzzier than it became after the second world war. Similar surveys had been carried out by black scholars like W.E.B. Du Bois, who published “The Philadelphia Negro” in 1899. If Alexander’s work now seems novel it may be only because economists have lost sight of this tradition. Perhaps not coincidentally, the work was often carried out by scholars—black, female or both—who were themselves marginalised, says Dan Hirschman of Brown University.After leaving university, Alexander wove her economic ideas into her speeches and articles. She argued that factory jobs were more dignified than household drudgery, which was priceless and therefore thankless. She welcomed the fact that many black women worked outside their homes, but complained that they were often employed “unproductively”. Two-thirds earned a pittance as servants, she reported during the Great Depression. The remainder were mostly farmhands. “We still find barefoot Negro women hoeing, planting and picking the crops. Theirs is not even an existence; it is a fight for…survival.”Some policies designed to relieve the Depression neglected black workers. New pensions and unemployment insurance introduced in 1935 left out both servants and farm labourers. “It is clear that in his years of planning for Social Security of the common man, Mr Roosevelt never had in mind the security of the American Negro,” she said. Other policies made things worse. Many blacks in the South could get only jobs that whites did not want at pay they would not accept. When the National Industrial Recovery Act lifted the wages and prestige of these jobs, blacks lost them. Roosevelt’s national recovery act, she thought, might as well be called the “Negro Reduction Act”.In a downturn, when people are reluctant to spend, there are only so many jobs to go round. White workers vie with blacks—one source of racial friction between them. But mobilisation for the second world war showed that another economy was possible. The huge increase in wartime spending created 10m jobs, vindicating the Keynesian ideas that Alexander also embraced. To maintain full employment in peacetime, she argued that the government should tax idle profits (spending the proceeds on public investment) and bolster the purchasing power of idled workers. This spending would contribute to high employment and high employment would sustain liberal spending.The need for full employment featured prominently in the National Urban League’s annual conference in 1944. Black workers were “the last to be hired and the first to be fired” when employment was anything less than full, as Alexander pointed out. With steady jobs, blacks could acquire seniority, skills and the solidarity of union membership. By removing white workers’ “fears of economic rivalry”, full employment would also ease racial prejudice and repair American democracy. Economic insecurity, on the other hand, would encourage people to support demagogic leaders, lured by the “vain promises of a self-proclaimed messiah”. Her warning, Ms Banks says, “speaks to our time”.As the country prepared to demobilise in 1945, Alexander urged black workers to act with a “deep sense of responsibility” to each other. She worried that “absenteeism, lateness, loafing on the job” by any black worker would harm the prospects of all. She felt the same heavy burden of responsibility in her own professional life. Her grades were as eye-catching as her sandwiches. Her court petitions were fastidious. Her proposal to Philadelphia for a civil-rights commission was accepted “without removing a comma”. After becoming pregnant, she stayed at her legal post for as long as possible, “both for myself and for all women”.Her response to the unreasonable demands placed on her was not to reject them but to exceed them. “I felt the burdens of the world on my shoulders,” she once said. Alexander is being rightly revived as an inspirational hero for today. But few could follow her example. And none should have to. 