Jan 2nd 2021FacebookTwitterLinkedInWhatsAppTHE FRENCH, wrote George Canning, a British statesman, to a ministerial colleague in 1825, “have but two rules of action: to thwart us whenever they know our object; and when they know it not, to imagine one, and to set about thwarting that.” Canning’s grumble, made a decade after the end of the Napoleonic wars, sounds oddly familiar two centuries later. And today it is not only the British who follow what might be called Canning’s law: when in doubt, blame the French. Suspicion of France’s intentions, and criticism of its actions, have been on the rise in several other countries, in sometimes understandable but often perplexing ways.Exhibit A is, of course, Brexit. “Only preening Emmanuel Macron stands in the way of Boris Johnson’s triumph,” thundered the Daily Mail when a deal seemed improbable. Downing Street hyped up French demands, and vowed to dispatch gunboats to defend British fishing waters. Yet other EU leaders too had threatened to walk away from talks. When Britain announced a new covid-19 strain had got out of control, several EU countries shut their borders. Yet “Covidiot Macron” was uniquely pilloried. A British official accused the French of “trying to take food off our shelves for Christmas out of spite.” Britain, it seemed, had fallen victim to sly Gallic posturing, designed to punish and enfeeble an old rival.Or consider the finger-pointing directed at France after recent terrorist attacks against the country. In the wake of the beheading in October 2020 of Samuel Paty, a schoolteacher who had shown his pupils caricatures of the Prophet Muhammad, Mr Macron became a public enemy in parts of the Muslim world. His offence was to have defended the French law on freedom of expression that protects blasphemy (against any religion). As a false rumour spread that France was to give Muslim children ID numbers, a Pakistani government minister tweeted: “Macron is doing to Muslims what the Nazis did to the Jews.” This absurd tweet was later retracted. Not so the comment by Turkey’s leader, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, declaring the French president mentally ill.It is hardly surprising that authoritarian regimes find Mr Macron a useful whipping boy—a bit of outrage directed at foreigners distracts people from injustice closer to home. More wounding for the French is that some parts of the American media accuse France of being peculiarly responsible for breeding terrorists. To be sure, there are legitimate and complex questions to be asked about the French model of secularism known as laïcité, and whether a new bill to combat Islamism confuses conservative religiosity with opposition to democratic governance. Yet France is hardly Europe’s only incubator of terrorism. Just over a decade ago it was British multiculturalism that was widely blamed for Islamist radicalisation, notes Lorenzo Vidino, director of George Washington University’s programme on extremism. As a share of population, Belgium, Denmark and Sweden—none of them practitioners of French secularism—sent more jihadist fighters to Syria and Iraq than France did.Some of the criticism France draws abroad is fair. It has pursued a few half-baked ideas, such as seeking a security partnership with Vladimir Putin’s Russia. Mr Macron’s assertion that Islam is “in crisis” around the world was particularly ill-judged. He indulged in some counterproductive tough talk on Brexit, partly because he enjoys saying things in public that other Europeans prefer to say behind closed doors. Indeed, the French president seems to relish controversy, whether he is decrying NATO’s “brain death” or sending French warships to defend Greek waters from Turkish oil and gas exploration. Such outspokenness and pesky unilateralism are familiar themes in French history, and they have often bred distrust on the part of baffled allies. “I must confess, my dear General,” wrote President Dwight Eisenhower to Charles de Gaulle in 1960, with magnificent restraint,“that I cannot quite understand the basic philosophy of France today.”All of which raises two thoughts and a paradox. The first thought might be summed up as “Foucault’s revenge”. America’s left, with its embrace of identity politics and scepticism towards universal individualist values, is deeply influenced by the postmodern French critical theorists of the 1970s. Yet France’s leaders are unapologetic defenders of just such universal individualist values, which are among the country’s founding principles. American liberals, who had thought Mr Macron one of them, struggle to make sense of a liberal French leader who curbs religious expression. It feels like a betrayal.Emmanuel in ParisA second reflection touches on why the French are considered fair game. “France has been the beneficiary, particularly among Americans, of a constructed fantasy,” suggests Matthew Fraser, at the American University of Paris. This is the romantic promise of intellectual sophistication, culture and effortless chic. Captured in exaggerated form by the Netflix series “Emily in Paris”, it is an ideal embodied by those Americans—Gertrude Stein, Ernest Hemingway, Josephine Baker, Richard Wright—who adopted Paris in the 20th century. Nobody likes to mock an underdog. But France, self-satisfied and secretly envied, seems as if it can take the ribbing.And so to the paradox. France finds itself picked upon at a time when Europe has seldom been so open to embracing French ideas. French proposals that were once politely read and shelved by European friends—common EU debt issuance, taxes on tech giants, sanctions on Turkey, even “strategic autonomy” in defence—are no longer debated only in the parquet-floored salons of Paris. They are increasingly approved by the EU. For Mr Macron, whose visibility will grow in 2021 as Angela Merkel’s chancellorship ends, this presents both an opportunity and a peril. The harder the French president pushes his ideas, the more progress he may make, but the more he may irritate others. Every story needs a villain, and as Canning knew, the French make a tempting one.