Jan 2nd 2021BERLINFacebookTwitterLinkedInWhatsApp“WHAT A PRESIDENCY it has been!” After a gruelling all-night EU summit in mid-December, Ursula von der Leyen, the head of the European Commission, reserved her biggest smile for Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor. The summit, at which the EU’s leaders found agreement on a number of tricky issues, capped Germany’s six-month presidency of the EU Council, which it will hand over to Portugal on January 1st. It may also prove to be the high-water mark of Mrs Merkel’s final term in office.One year ago Mrs Merkel was starting to cut a diminished figure. Having promised not to stand for a fifth term, she buried herself in foreign policy while the scrap to succeed her began to consume domestic politics. Her centre-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU) was below 30% in polls, riven by squabbles that forced Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, Mrs Merkel’s presumed heir, to quit as CDU leader. The chancellor’s succession plans lay in tatters.Two things changed the mood. The first was the pandemic, which thrust Mrs Merkel onto centre-stage again. In a televised address on March 18th she grabbed Germans’ attention by describing the novel coronavirus as the country’s greatest challenge since 1945. More recently, as Germany battles a deadlier second wave, she has delivered impassioned pleas in parliament to lock down harder and faster (the constitution reserves such powers to the states). Germany’s early success in keeping deaths down, its strong fiscal response and Mrs Merkel’s calm bearing restored her fortunes. She now basks in approval ratings of over 70%, and her party’s standing has rocketed (see chart).Then came the EU Council presidency. As the strains of covid-19 tested Europe’s bonds, Mrs Merkel broke the German taboo against common debt and agreed to a €750bn ($916bn) EU-wide fund to aid recovery in 2021 and beyond. She later persuaded the troublesome governments of Poland and Hungary to sign on to new rule-of-law provisions in the EU’s budget rules, and helped arrange a tightening of the EU’s climate targets. December brought more success: having avoided a no-deal Brexit, the EU looked set, as The Economist went to press, to agree on the outline of an investment deal with China. That is a prize long sought by Mrs Merkel, though it irks Europe’s growing band of Sinosceptics and the incoming Biden administration.Little wonder Jens Spahn, Germany’s health minister, says that voters have failed to register that the chancellor is on her way out. Yet as the EU presidency and the worst phase of the pandemic recede into the past, Mrs Merkel’s star may fade faster than expected. In 2021 a series of political events will build towards the general election in September, reminding voters that the Merkel era will soon be over.The first is the election of a new CDU leader at a virtual party congress on January 16th. The three men standing for the job see it as a stepping-stone to the chancellery. Yet the campaign has been dispiriting, and not only because covid-19 postponed the voting twice. The debates have been platitudinous, and CDU grandees appear to fear that too vigorous a contest over the party’s post-Merkel future might expose hard-to-heal divisions just months before an election campaign.None of the three has captured the imagination of the party’s supporters. The periodic outbursts of Friedrich Merz, a flinty tax-cut advocate, excite the CDU’s conservative base but worry moderates who know German elections are won from the middle. Armin Laschet, the bland if jovial leader of North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany’s most populous state, has no obvious pitch beyond Merkellian centrism; his poll numbers have nosedived. Norbert Röttgen, a foreign-policy expert once sacked by Mrs Merkel, was originally written off. A lively campaign appealing to women and the young has put him into contention, but he remains an outsider.SomeCDU figures grumble more or less openly that Mr Spahn, who has handled the pressures of his job well, is better suited to leadership than Mr Laschet, to whom he has pledged fealty. Many also gaze longingly towards Bavaria and Markus Söder, its charismatic premier and head of the Christian Social Union (CSU), the CDU’s sister party. The larger CDU would normally expect a decisive say when the two parties pick a joint candidate for the chancellorship, probably in the spring. But a string of confident performances during the covid crisis have transformed Mr Söder into one of Germany’s most popular politicians. His denials of interest in the top job have failed to stop the question from being asked.All this leaves the CDU with a problem. Of the three most popular conservative politicians in Germany, one (Mrs Merkel) is retiring; another (Mr Spahn) is holding fire; and a third (Mr Söder) claims to have no further ambitions. The three men seeking to run the CDU, meanwhile, languish an embarrassing distance behind. Whether Mr Spahn and Mr Söder can keep their ambition in check remains to be seen. But the CDU’s uncomfortable position will concentrate minds among the 1,001 party delegates charged with choosing their next leader.All sides acknowledge that the CDU/CSU’s strong polling conceals a large “Merkel-bonus” that will largely expire before the election. It will be easier to see how big it is once the party picks a new leader. The ascendant Greens, who briefly overtook the CDU/CSU in 2019, hope to soak up some centrist votes, particularly if Mr Merz wins in January. So does Olaf Scholz, the mild-mannered finance minister and vice-chancellor, who will lead the Social Democrats (SPD) into the election. But his early consecration as chancellor-candidate has so far failed to lift his party’s dismal ratings.Germany’s parties will also compete in five state elections in 2021. Two in Germany’s east may test the CDU’s firewall against co-operation with the hard right Alternative for Germany. But the most significant, in March, will be in Baden-Württemberg, a rich southern state led by the Greens in coalition with the CDU. That arrangement may prove a dry run for a national coalition, but with the CDU/CSU as senior partner. Both parties are visibly preparing for such a “black-green” coalition, but a head-spinning array of other configurations are possible in what is set to be Germany’s most unpredictable election in decades. Mrs Merkel prizes stability above almost all else, but there will be less and less of it as she prepares to relinquish the country’s leadership. 